feat(artifacts): support ephemeral credentials for S3. Fixes #5446 (#12467)
argoproj/argo-workflows: docs/configure-artifact-repository.md

## Configuring AWS S3

First, create your bucket:

```bash

> export mybucket=bucket249

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mybucket=my-bucket-name
```

- this doesn't need exporting, since it's only used within the same shell here
- give a more example-like name so that users don't potentially think that `bucket249` is a required name (it's not)

aws s3 mb s3://$mybucket [--region xxx]
```

> Next, create a policy which will be saved locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a policy file.
```

simplify

> You will attach this to the relevant authentication method in one of the sections below.

Reviewer: So this isn't used by all of them anymore, right? Since S3 Access Grants don't need this. We may want to subdivide IAM and non-IAM access? i.e. have a heading "AWS S3 IAM Access" or something and have the IAM methods all underneath it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will attach this in one of the sections below based on your chosen authentication method.
```

reword and simplify a bit

Author: Yep, sounds good, I'll do that.

```bash

> $ export mybucket=bucket249

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

`mybucket` is defined above now, so this is no longer needed.

also could you remove the `$ ` in the line below as well?

## Configuring AWS S3

> First, create your bucket:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a bucket:
```

- Matching "a policy file" etc below
- Also "a" better implies that it can be _any_ bucket

to associate with the access key. Otherwise, you can just create an access key
using your existing user account.

Although users are not able to have a reduced scope, S3 access grants created
via a user are. These credentials however, are temporary, and therefore need

> to be periodically generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Author: I originally put the note about reduced scope in here since the paragraph above addresses the scope of IAM users. I'm going to change this section in its entirety to just describe the bucket creation only and move the relevant credential setup into other subheadings.

> to be periodically generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Reviewer: Yea I noticed that too, and yes I think moving it to a dedicated IAM user section while leaving the top as common bucket creation makes sense

> to be periodically generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Author: @agilgur5 Do you have any opinions on how much detail should be provided for each authentication option? The docs are currently rather thorough for IAM users, but basically very empty for IRSA. I've currently added a bit more detail for IRSA and IAM roles, but I'm unsure of how much to add for S3 access grants, since the setup is more involved. I'd prefer to defer to the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants-get-started.html), and just say once you have obtained credentials in step 4, you can use them in Argo Workflows with the snippet below

> to be periodically generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Reviewer: Yes generally we should defer & link to upstream docs where possible, use examples, and avoid too much commentary. "Simple and direct language", per [k8s style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-simple-and-direct-language), makes for very efficient and straightforward docs.

Best practices (like security recommendations on this page) are good to note, but we don't need to go into detail for those, as they are not Argo specific and so are better explained upstream anyway.

> to be periodically generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Author: Ok great. I'll push up what I'm proposing now and would appreciate if you could let me know if I should continue in this direction

> The example below creates a bucket, a user that is able to access the bucket,
> and a set of access keys. The procedure is the same if you wish to use an IAM role,
> except you will need to instead create a role and attach the same policy as below.
> Please note that role credentials are temporary and will need to be periodically
> generated/refreshed by an external mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below creates a bucket, a user, a policy for the user to access the bucket, and a set of access keys:
```
- prefer 1 sentence per line of markdown, per [style guide](https://argo-workflows.readthedocs.io/en/release-3.5/doc-changes/)

Similar to above, I'd make a separate section on IAM roles if you want to enumerate that

   ]
}
EOF
```

If you do not have Artifact Garbage Collection configured, you should remove `s3:DeleteObject` from the list of Actions above.

!!! Note "Discovering bucket regions"
    If you want Argo Workflows to figure out which region your buckets belong in, you must additionally set the following statement policy.
    Otherwise, you must specify a bucket region in your workflow configuration.

```json
      {
        "Effect":"Allow",
        "Action":[
            "s3:GetBucketLocation"
        ],
        "Resource":"arn:aws:s3:::*"
      }
    ...
```

### AWS S3 IRSA

> Using IRSA is the recommended Kubernetes' native mechanism.
> If you are using AWS EKS, see [the AWS documentation to enable it in your cluster](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html).
> If you are not, see the [EKS Pod Identity Webhook instructions](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook/blob/master/SELF_HOSTED_SETUP.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) is the recommended Kubernetes native mechanism to authenticate to S3.
If you are using EKS, follow [the IRSA setup guide](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html).
If not, follow the [Pod Identity Webhook self-hosted setup guide](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook/blob/master/SELF_HOSTED_SETUP.md).
```

- Use the full name somewhere
- "mechanism to authenticate with S3", answering the question "mechanism for what?"
- consistently use the wording "follow the X setup guide" for the two options
  - remove the "EKS" portion from the second one to confuse users less
  - (also last I checked, the Pod Identity Webhook failed on self-hosted clusters and was still pretty alpha)

Author: Sounds good. I'm actually not sure about the webhook on self-hosted clusters - we are using EKS. I included this for posterity, since the docs previously made no mention about how IRSA is used in either case. If you're concerned about it still being pretty experimental, I can remove this line entirely to not mislead users.

Reviewer: I've been using kOps for ~7 years; last I tried the EKS webhook was 2+ years ago and it did not work -- I don't remember why but I remember it was an unresolved issue and there are more of those in the repo now 😕

The (less optimal) alternatives that pre-date IRSA are [`kiam`](https://github.com/uswitch/kiam) and [`kube2iam`](https://github.com/jtblin/kube2iam) and perhaps others. I was thinking we perhaps link to a few, but I see that `kiam` was abandoned in the past year https://github.com/uswitch/kiam/pull/528 and `kube2iam` is similarly lacking updates https://github.com/jtblin/kube2iam/issues/376 https://github.com/jtblin/kube2iam/issues/373.

So 😕
 I'm fine leaving the self-hosted guide on as it did not get much attention in the past and perhaps more attention will mean AWS maintains it better(??)

> If you have created a bucket and policy as described above, you can then create an IAM role and add the policy with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the bucket and policy described above, create an IAM user and add the policy:
```

simplify + active voice, same as above

```bash
aws iam create-role --role-name $mybucket-role
aws iam put-role-policy --role-name $mybucket-user --policy-name $mybucket-policy --policy-document file://policy.json
```

To use S3 IRSA, you need to annotate the service account of both the running workflow (in order to save logs/artifacts) and the argo-server pod (in order to retrieve the logs/artifacts).
You can attach only one IAM role to a service account, so your roles must have permission for all buckets you may wish to use.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  annotations:
    eks.amazonaws.com/role-arn: arn:aws:iam::012345678901:role/mybucket-role
  name: myserviceaccount
  namespace: mynamespace
```

> You can then use the service account in a workflow as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the service account in a workflow:
```

simplify + active voice

```yaml
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: Workflow
spec:
  serviceAccountName: myserviceaccount
```

> ### AWS S3 with IAM user credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS S3 with IAM Access Keys
```

that's the conventional term for it I believe

> AWS access keys have the same permissions as the user they are associated with.
> In particular, you cannot create access keys with reduced scope.
> If you want to limit the permissions for an access key, you will need to create a user with just the permissions you want to associate with the access key.
> Otherwise, you can just create an access key using your existing user account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce the permissions for an access key, create a user with only the permissions necessary.
```

We can simplify this quite a bit. I might suggest putting this in an admonition actually:

```suggestion
!!! Note "Least privilege user"
    To reduce the privileges of an access key, create a user with only the necessary permissions and no more.
```

> If you have created a bucket and policy as described above, you can create an IAM user, add the policy and create a set of access keys with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the bucket and policy described above, create an IAM user, add the policy, and create access keys:
```
simplify + active voice, same as above

```bash
aws iam create-user --user-name $mybucket-user
aws iam put-user-policy --user-name $mybucket-user --policy-name $mybucket-policy --policy-document file://policy.json
aws iam create-access-key --user-name $mybucket-user > access-key.json
```

> You can then use the access keys by configuring your artifact as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure an artifact with the access keys:
```

simplify + active voice, same as above

```yaml
artifacts:
  - name: my-output-artifact
    path: /my-output-artifact
    s3:
      endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
      bucket: my-s3-bucket
      key: path/in/bucket/my-output-artifact.tgz
      # The following secret entries are secret selectors.
      # They reference the k8s secret named 'my-s3-credentials'.
      # This secret is expected to have the keys 'accessKey' and 'secretKey',
      # containing the base64 encoded credentials to the bucket.
      accessKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: accessKey
      secretKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: secretKey
```

> ### AWS S3 with IAM role credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS S3 with IAM assume role
```

perhaps better named, easier to search? similar to above

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> v3.6 and after

```

add a version reference, per #12581

> You can use IAM role credentials for temporary access.

Reviewer: Is there an AWS link you can add here?

> If you have created a bucket and policy as described above, you can then create an IAM role and add the policy with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the bucket and policy described above, create an IAM role and add the policy:
```

simplify and use active voice

```bash
aws iam create-role --role-name $mybucket-role
aws iam put-role-policy --role-name $mybucket-user --policy-name $mybucket-policy --policy-document file://policy.json
```

> You can then obtain the credentials set by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieve the role credentials:
```

- simplify + active voice
- also used "retrieve" instead of "obtain" as a more common word

```bash

> aws sts assume-role --role-arn rn:aws:iam::012345678901:role/$mybucket-role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aws sts assume-role --role-arn arn:aws:iam::012345678901:role/$mybucket-role
```

there's a typo here, missing "a" in "arn", if I'm not mistaken

```

> After which you can use the credentials in your artifact configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure an artifact with the credentials:
```

simplify + active voice, same as above

```yaml
artifacts:
  - name: my-output-artifact
    path: /my-output-artifact
    s3:
      endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
      bucket: my-s3-bucket
      key: path/in/bucket/my-output-artifact.tgz
      # The following secret entries are secret selectors.
      # They reference the k8s secret named 'my-s3-credentials'.
      # This secret is expected to have the keys 'accessKey', 'secretKey', and 'sessionToken',
      # containing the base64 encoded credentials to the bucket.
      accessKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: accessKey
      secretKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: secretKey
      sessionTokenSecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: sessionToken
```

!!! Note "IAM role credentials are temporary"
    IAM role credentials are temporary, so you must refresh them periodically via an external mechanism.
    Argo Workflows will not refresh them for you.

> ### AWS S3 Access Grants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS S3 with S3 Access Grants
```

add the "with" here so that it's consistent with the other headings

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> v3.6 and after

```

same as above

You can use [S3 Access Grants](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants.html) for temporary, reduced scope access.

> Read the [getting started guide](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants-get-started.html) to set this up in your AWS account.

Reviewer: Ah I see, you put this here because there's no commands to run in this section, unlike the others (as it's more complicated. Let's re-word this a bit then:

```suggestion
Follow the [AWS guide](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants-get-started.html) to set this up in your account and retrieve access grant credentials.
```

- This now segues into the next sentence more neatly
- also "getting started guide" is ambiguous since Argo has a similarly named guide

Once you have created an access grant and received a set of credentials, you can use them in your artifact configuration:

```yaml
artifacts:
  - name: my-output-artifact
    path: /my-output-artifact
    s3:
      endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
      bucket: my-s3-bucket
      key: path/in/bucket/my-output-artifact.tgz
      # The following secret entries are secret selectors.
      # They reference the k8s secret named 'my-s3-credentials'.
      # This secret is expected to have the keys 'accessKey', 'secretKey', and 'sessionToken',
      # containing the base64 encoded credentials to the bucket.
      accessKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: accessKey
      secretKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: secretKey
      sessionTokenSecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: sessionToken
```

> !!! Note "S3 access grants are temporary"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Note "Temporary"
```

same as above

   ]
}
EOF
```

> If you do not have Artifact Garbage Collection configured, you should remove `s3:DeleteObject` from the list of Actions above.

Reviewer: You didn't change this part, but this should have a link. I'd also probably invert this and remove `s3:DeleteObject` initially and say to add it if you do have ArtifactGC enabled, i.e. following least privilege. Since you didn't change this, we can do that in a separate PR too.

```suggestion
If you do not have [Artifact Garbage Collection](walk-through/artifacts.md#artifact-garbage-collection) configured, you should remove `s3:DeleteObject` from the list of Actions above.
```

> !!! Note "Discovering bucket regions"
>     If you want Argo Workflows to figure out which region your buckets belong in, you must additionally set the following statement policy.
>     Otherwise, you must specify a bucket region in your workflow configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Note "Region discovery"
    Argo can discover the region of your buckets with the additional policy below.
    Without this, you must specify the region in your artifact configuration.
```

simplify.

also the below example needs to add 4 space indentation to the entire code-block so that it will show up under the note. It might make sense to change this to a heading instead of a large note?

Author: It was originally a really bad 

> NOTE: If you want... 
> `code`

block, so I just wanted to improve it a little bit here. 

I originally tried indenting the code block but it failed the linting rules due to the code block being indented instead of fenced (even though it was both). Happy to change this to a heading.

Reviewer: Yea you need to temporarily disable the linting rule to get it to work; can see an example in this review comment & commit: https://github.com/argoproj/argo-workflows/pull/12809#issuecomment-2036237459

```json
      {
        "Effect":"Allow",
        "Action":[
            "s3:GetBucketLocation"
        ],
        "Resource":"arn:aws:s3:::*"
      }
    ...
```

#### AWS S3 IRSA

IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) is the recommended Kubernetes native mechanism to authenticate to S3.
If you are using EKS, follow [the IRSA setup guide](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html).
If not, follow the [Pod Identity Webhook self-hosted setup guide](https://github.com/aws/amazon-eks-pod-identity-webhook/blob/master/SELF_HOSTED_SETUP.md).

With the bucket and policy as described above, create an IAM role and add the policy:

```bash
aws iam create-role --role-name $mybucket-role
aws iam put-role-policy --role-name $mybucket-user --policy-name $mybucket-policy --policy-document file://policy.json
```

> To use S3 IRSA, you need to annotate the service account of both the running workflow (in order to save logs/artifacts) and the argo-server pod (in order to retrieve the logs/artifacts).
> You can attach only one IAM role to a service account, so your roles must have permission for all buckets you may wish to use.

Reviewer: You didn't change this either, but this is also very confusing and suggests excessive privileges as well. In https://github.com/argoproj/argo-workflows/pull/13425#pullrequestreview-2214101470 I suggested separating out Server permissions into its own section, as it's optional and largely orthogonal given that it's read access vs write access.

For this PR, I might suggest simplifying this to only what the example below does, and leave the rest to a separate PR adding a Server section

```suggestion
Attach this IAM role to a service account with an annotation:
```

Author: Yep, can do. I feel like it is still important to have somewhere, since obviously when the artifacts are retrieved via the UI, it can fail, but agree, maybe it should be in the server docs rather than here.

Reviewer: Yea I was thinking of adding a "## Server Read-only Access" section at the bottom of this page with similar sections for AWS, GCP, Azure, etc.

The Server docs could link to that section as it's mostly artifact specific but different from all the write permissions here

Author: @agilgur5 Should we make a separate issue to address this later?

Reviewer: Yea I'll create it

```bash
aws iam create-role --role-name $mybucket-role
aws iam put-role-policy --role-name $mybucket-user --policy-name $mybucket-policy --policy-document file://policy.json
```

Retrieve the role credentials:

```bash
aws sts assume-role --role-arn arn:aws:iam::012345678901:role/$mybucket-role
```

Configure an artifact with the credentials:

```yaml
artifacts:
  - name: my-output-artifact
    path: /my-output-artifact
    s3:
      endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
      bucket: my-s3-bucket
      key: path/in/bucket/my-output-artifact.tgz
      # The following fields are secret selectors.
      # They reference the k8s secret named 'my-s3-credentials'.
      # This secret is expected to have the keys 'accessKey', 'secretKey', and 'sessionToken',
      # containing the base64 encoded credentials to the bucket.
      accessKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: accessKey
      secretKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: secretKey
      sessionTokenSecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: sessionToken
```

!!! Note "Temporary"
    IAM role credentials are temporary, so you must refresh them periodically via an external mechanism.

>     Argo will not refresh them for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I had suggested removing this [before](https://github.com/argoproj/argo-workflows/pull/12467#discussion_r1746330826) as it is redundant with the above sentence.

We can leave it in if you feel strongly about it, but you hadn't commented there, so not sure if leaving this in intentional

Author: I'm ok to remove it. Just wanted to make it clear, but I guess the first sentence is already pretty clear.

Author: Yeh, I don't know off the top of my head. For the access grants, we wrote our own admission controller which retrieves the credentials and injects them at workflow creation time, but it's not open source (for now).

> ### AWS S3 non-IAM Access
> 
> #### AWS S3 with Access Grants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS S3 with S3 Access Grants
```

I'd actually leave out the additional "non-IAM" heading for now as there are no other methods in that same category right now. (Could also remove "non-IAM" from `.spelling` then)

Also my [previous comment](https://github.com/argoproj/argo-workflows/pull/12467#discussion_r1747482853) suggested saying "S3 Access Grants" vs. plain "Access Grants". Since S3 can be accessed via IAM and those methods specifically state "IAM" in their headings. Also "Access Grants" are very close in naming to "Access Keys" so more disambiguation is not bad in this case, IMO

Author: Ah yep, sorry, just misread that. Happy to change that.

    ...
```

### AWS S3 with IAM credentials or S3 access grants

> Below is an example of how to use credentials from an [S3 access grant](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants.html)
> or temporary credentials from an IAM role. If you are using an IAM user, omit the `sessionTokenSecret` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use [S3 Access Grants](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-grants.html) for temporary access:
```

style guide:
- active voice, per [k8s style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-active-voice)
- simplify, per [k8s style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-simple-and-direct-language)
- prefer 1 sentence per line of markdown, per [style guide](https://argo-workflows.readthedocs.io/en/release-3.5/doc-changes/)

other:
- remove IAM credentials part as that should be separate and not combined
- add note about refreshing below the example instead

```yaml
artifacts:
  - name: my-output-artifact
    path: /my-output-artifact
    s3:
      endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
      bucket: my-s3-bucket

>       # NOTE that, by default, all output artifacts are automatically tarred and
>       # gzipped before saving. So as a best practice, .tgz or .tar.gz
>       # should be incorporated into the key name so the resulting file
>       # has an accurate file extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This isn't needed in this section (and it should probably be removed from this page entirely, as it is more specific to the artifacts page rather than configuring artifact repositories)

      key: path/in/bucket/my-output-artifact.tgz

>       accessKeySecret:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # accessKeySecret is a secret selector.
      # It references the k8s secret named 'my-s3-credentials'.
      # This secret is expected to have the keys 'accessKey', 'secretKey', and 'sessionToken',
      # containing the base64 encoded credentials
      # to the bucket.
      accessKeySecret:
```

explain how the secret selectors work, which are necessary for this feature, and which is consistent with other examples on this page

        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: accessKey
      secretKeySecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: secretKey
      sessionTokenSecret:
        name: my-s3-credentials
        key: sessionToken
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

!!! Note "Temporary"
    S3 Access Grants are temporary, so you will need to periodically refresh them.
    
```

moved the temporary note to here, per above
